Andrew Begel
CS302 HW11
4/12/99

1. 40 hours per week means I can have two TAs each teaching two sections
of 20-25 students each.

What duties would I assign to my TAs? 

For a typical TA, one that has taught at least once before and got OK
ratings from a course evaluation, I would give them the following
tasks: 

       a. prepare one recitation per week. in each recitation, they
       should go over the lecture material, as well as clarify
       concepts that students should have learned that week. in
       addition, tas should disseminate and confirm administrative
       details for the course. tas should handle most administrative
       issues, however, issues with test timing and grades should be
       brought to the professor.

       b. prepare one lab demo per week. in the first part of the
       course, students will be working with new programming
       environments. the tas should have played with the environment a
       week beforehand and come up with example demos to show
       students.  in the second part of the course, students will be
       writing algorithms to implement compiler IRs and
       optimizations. here, tas will act as lab assistants, but should
       perhaps prepare a worksheet for students to work on for the
       first 15 minutes of lab.

       c. hold two office hours per week. tas should make themselves
       available during each office hour for student questions on any
       aspect of homework and tests. administrative details coming up
       here should be handled as best the ta can, and if necessary
       defer to the professor. 

       d. conduct two "student interviews" during the term. each ta
       will schedule an hour twice in the term to meet with each
       student individually. this interview will be part examination,
       where the ta will confirm students knowledge of basic facts
       (the professor will provide a list of what to cover); part
       gripe session, where the student may question administrative
       issues, grading, the professor's teaching style, the ta's
       teaching style (probably won't happen here), and ask any
       burning questions about course content. 

       it is up to the ta to notify the professor of any student who
       appears to be having major problems in the course. if the
       student does not perform satisfactorially in this interview, an
       interview will be scheduled with the professor to get to the
       root of the problem. 

       e. read and respond to email queries from students. if the ta
       feels comfortable enough, they might choose to get an
       additional AOL instant messenger and/or ICQ acct. and publish
       to the students for on-the-fly help sessions. in addition, the
       ta should make an effort to read and respond to newsgroup
       queries at least twice per week.

       f. help grade exams 

       g. help generate exams, by taking the class's exam one week
       before the class takes it, and providing feedback. in addition,
       each ta should generate one or more exam questions for each
       exam and give them to the professor two weeks before the exam.
 
       h. hold three review sessions per term before each test and
       final. each ta should try to attend, and prepare material on a
       topic from the class. the tas should coordinate topics amongst
       themselves.

       i. receive teaching feedback from the professor twice per
       term. two times in the term, the professor will attend
       recitation and lab for each ta and make observations. this will
       enable the professor to give the ta tips and feedback on
       teaching, style, and content.

       j. if the course has no readers, the tas will grade
       homeworks. in any case, the tas will grade any homework
       essays. homeworks should be handed back within one week
       (preferably) or two weeks of the students handing them in.

       k. attend weekly ta meetings with the professor to discuss the
       course, the week's progress and next week's agenda. hold a
       "good and welfare", where each ta gets the floor and may speak
       about teaching successes, failures, good students, bad
       students, anecdotes, complaints, etc. in addition, the
       professor should ascertain that no student in the class is
       falling through the cracks.
              
How would you modify this for:

1. an inexperienced ta:

   b. the professor will provide a demo session for the tas so they
   can get a handle on the environment. in addition, the professor
   will give tas at least one demo to play with that they can present
   to students.
   
   g. only provide one question for each exam. professor will provide
   ta with feedback on the question and how it may be turned into a
   proper test question.

   i. the professor will spend an extra two recitations with the ta in
   the early part of the course to give feedback on teaching style,
   methodology and content.

2. an experienced ta:

   b. the above for 1 is still a good idea.

   g. experienced tas should try to come up with more than one exam
   question.

   i. the professor may choose to spend only one recitation monitoring
   the ta in each term.

3. an eager but inept ta:

   b. ditto.

   i. the professor will do as 1, but provide special private feedback 
sessions for the ta. ta will be encouraged to sign up for "ta
training" seminars.

4. a contrary ta

   b. ditto.
   
   i. professor should do as 3. 

   i'm not really sure what to do in this situation.


2. What things would you do as a professor to help make your tas
better teachers? I think the things I outlined above will cover it.

Bonus. How much role should tas play in adminstering to late homeworks 
and projects? I think that all late homeworks and late projects should 
be brought to the professor. it may be an interesting experiment to
consult with the tas on whether or not to grant extensions to
particular students. even in the case where a student charges
favoritism, it's often easy to acquiese to let them get a similar
extension, or explain to the student how their situation is
"completely" different. :) the tas may have additional information
about the overall demeanor and performance of the student which may
have an "emotional" bearing on the leniency offered by the prof.

