Andrew Begel
CS302 PS8
3/29/99

1. 

Exams Total: 65%

Of the 65%:
	Exam 1: 25%	90 minutes
	Exam 2: 25%	90 minutes
	Final:  50%	180 minutes

The first two exams will cover the material for each of the first two
sections of the course: programming language design, and compiler
backends. The final will stress the third part of the course: runtime
systems, but will also include questions covered by the first two
exams. 

I split up the scoring on the tests roughly by time allotted. I think
that each part of the course will be equally difficult <grin>, so on a 
longer final there will be more opportunity for more in-depth
questions that require more evaluation and analysis than those on
earlier tests. 

Labs/Homework: 20%

Checkoff system to ensure that the lab has been done. Then the
students will turn in their work and get graded out of 10
points. There are 9 labs/homeworks. Since labs/homeworks are worked on 
in groups, the students should turn in individual write ups. 

Weekly Essay: 15%

This essay requirement encourages them to do the reading and asks them 
to think critically about the material they're learning. Most will be
based on the lecture's content and the lab work for each week. Some
will be special topics.  


The general distribution of grades tends to weight the exams. I think
that it is difficult to measure an individual student's ability
through group projects, however, since it is important that they do
them, the checkoff process will help to encourage each student in the
group to understand the whole lab. I make the essay almost equivalent
to the homeworks, not because I really care about grading it, but it's 
got to be enough to make everyone do it. The process of writing these
is important enough to their education, howevermuch they might not
realize. 

The grades in this class will be on a curve. I don't like absolute
grading because I'd rather have students only have a vague sense of
their final grade during the course. I'd rather have them worry about
the course content than their incremental grades. The vague outlines
of the curve will be calculated for each exam to give students an idea 
about which "bucket" they fit in (A, B, C, D, or drop the class), but
the final determination will just probably rank every student and draw 
lines between them to make the grade distribution. I do believe that a 
pure curve isn't right, so if they get over 85-90%, it's an A. Even if 
the curve is skewed, I don't want a person who has a 90% to get an F
just because everyone had a 95%. That's silly and mean.

2. 

For a region of 5-10 students around each border, the TAs and I will
discuss the merits of raising or lowering the border around a
particular student. Relevant factors would be how much I or the TAs
know about the people; i.e. how hard they're trying, the trend of
their exam grades over time, how much time and energy went into their
weekly essays no matter how good or bad. If there's no reason to make
a student stand out in their "devotion" to the course, then the line
stays where it is.


