Andrew Begel
CS302 Review
5/3/99


Assignments

	Assignment 1: Good. This assignment is extremely necessary for
	getting us to realize the breadth of our course and judge the rough
	timing. Over the course of the class, I changed my mind about the
	specific timing of each section in addition to the amount of
	content I wanted to cover. It would have been good to reevaluate
	this schedule halfway through the term and revise it to be more
	realistic.

	Assignment 2: OK. The concept map was a good project to get us to
	figure out how to relate all of the big ideas in the coarse, but
	its node dependency breakdown doesn't easily translate actual
	topics to cover in a section or lecture. In addition, the ordering
	constraints implied are very loose. I think that the actual
	scheduling of concepts is more subject to the creativity of the
	instructor and how they want each piece to appear to the students.

	Assignment 3: Good. Elaborating on specific ways to teach the hard
	concept in the class was good, however, I'm not satisfied with my
	result. At this point, it was too easy to be too general about what
	I wrote down. Specific problems and exercises were harder to come
	by. Perhaps we could have worked on this over two weeks to actually
	come up with specific exercises to help with the concept.

	Assignment 4: Loved it. I loved creating a case study, since it
	seems to mirror how my brain works when leading a recitation. You
	try not to say too much, but you want to ask leading questions so
	they get the idea you're trying to have them understand. A future
	way to do this would be to develop it as a series of web pages, so
	you can refine the "control flow" of the reader's progress through
	the case study.

	Assignment 5: Loved it. This was also a very useful and helpful
	assignment. It felt long, but I think I enjoyed developing the 30
	different problems. If that categorization scheme is "correct," and
	effective, then it does make it much easier to develop exercises
	that appeal to a large number of students. An extension to this
	assignment would have us develop questions for an oral interview
	with students to gauge their knowledge. Again, it might have been
	nice to spend another week fleshing out the situated cognition
	exercises. Perhaps in general, you could pipeline assignments,
	where you submit a first half and a second half, and you can be
	working on a first half to the next assignment and the second half
	to the previous assignment at the same time.

	Assignment 6: Good. This assignment was good at forcing us to
	design real questions. It also showed us situations where certain
	types of questions (long, essay questions) might be bad for certain
	types of students (ESL, dyslexia). I would have liked more in-depth
	peer review from the other students in the class on the types of
	these questions.

	Assignment 7: Good. I liked developing group activities and exam
	questions. I enjoyed reading the papers that explained the
	rationale behind group activities and how to ejudicate them
	w.r.t. other grades in the class. The discussion of this assignment
	in class was fun.

	Assignment 8: Good. It's important to develop a grading policy, but
	I get the impression that new teachers have much more lenient
	policies than hardened teachers. I'm not sure yet if the new
	teachers are too naive, or the older teachers are too jaded. I
	guess experience will tell. I did enjoy the discussion here where
	Dan spoke about the grade prediction program that could tell the
	students exactly what grade they had at any time in the course. I
	still feel that ignorance is bliss. Life is much less stressful if
	you don't feel that you're being evaluated. :)

	Assignment 10: Good. It was hard for me to find a textbook that
	covered all of the topics I wanted. I found one that covered 1/3 of
	the class really well, but that's not fair to students to have them
	buy a mostly useless book. I think I'd go with the course reader
	approach and photocopy the pieces of the books that are
	relevant. This way you can get much more diversity of source
	material without too much extra work. I did like the 8 points of
	evaluating a text book but feel that clarity of explanation is much
	more important than any of the other factors (except coverage; who
	cares if it's clear, if it's not on your topic).

	Assignment 11: The TA policies were good because Dan and I were
	both very ambitious about what we wanted TAs to do. Unfortunately,
	I'm not sure that school policies would enable us to have as many
	TAs as we want. Hopefully, Arnie's paid course assistants will be
	adopted at every school we ever want to teach at in the future. :)

	Assignment 12: OK. This assignment was less successful in compilers
	than in graphics. First, the assignment didn't really distinguish
	between pedagogical innovations vs. subject-specific
	innovations. Compilers haven't changed much over time in terms of
	how they work. Pedagogical tools that apply across disciplines are
	much more interesting. I hope that it would be easy to set up these
	community-building concept-specific virtual environments for each
	class to participate in.
	

General Evalution

I thought most of the assignments were ok, but sometimes I felt like
they should have gone on for two weeks at a time (pipelined) instead
of just one. Or in some circumstances, they should be revisited later
in the class to revise/update them with better understanding of the
resource limits of students and teachers. 

In general, the way that we went over the assignments in class will
not scale to more than 3-4 students. It would be a good idea to make
the due date several days before class and give all the assignments to
the other students in the class. Then they could review the
assignments and evaluate them for the class. This way, they would
generate some good concrete feedback for each other.

I think that coming up with a lecture outline would have been a good
assignment. So, it's more similar to things we did in CS301, but from
the lecturer's point of view. Other than that, I think this class did
a good job at introducing all of the different pieces of a class that
have to be developed when preparing to teach one. 

It was vitally important that each person work on their own
class. While Dan's stuff on graphics is cool, I'm just interested
enough in teaching that class to want to design it. It would be too
difficult, other than designing an intro class, to make everyone do
the same thing. 

The workload of this class is fine. Compared to other classes, there
tends to be less work, but I'm comparing it to project classes. :) 

I've already made some suggestions about future changes, but in
general, the course is run pretty well. 

It would be nice to have CS302 students mentor a CS301 students while
they learn to TA for the first time. The idea is this: Each CS302
student could "adopt" a CS301 student who is teaching in their
area. Some of the CS302 assignments could be to conduct a peer review
of their adoptee's teaching. Other assignments could include helping
the adoptee prepare a section, prepare a lab exercise, tag-team teach
a section, prepare extra handouts to help students out with hard
material, etc... This could be incredibly beneficial not only to the
CS301 student who gets extra attention at TAing, but to the CS302
student for having to develop concrete materials for students to
use. The workload on the CS302 student is low since they don't
actually have to teach the section; they can just add value to it from
the sidelines.

I think this class has made me more excited about teaching. It's also
made me become more realistic about what you can cover in a term and
how fast you can cover it. It's pretty difficult to come up with
workable homework and exam questions. I get the feeling that
developing a whole course is a multi-year process, and that we
shouldn't feel bad about not quite holding up every aspect of the
class. Over several years of development, each piece could be fleshed
out and made to fit into the whole. However, with today's technology
and subject material changing so fast, it feels that we wouldn't be
able to quite keep up. Either something has to slow down, or we're
going to need more help for course development.  





	
